<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>The Sandbox</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./bukhari_textbook.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Bukhari Chancery Persian Textbook Development</h1>
      <h2>likelihood_me-gist</h2>
      <p>PDF version of this file:
         <a href="likelihood_me-gist.pdf">likelihood_me-gist.pdf</a></p>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Grammatical Explanation</h3>
         
         <p>Central Asian Persian has a special verbal mode to express likelihood,
            which it shares with Central Asian Turkic langauges such as Uzbek and Uyghur. This
            construction is common both in spoken Tajik and in Central Asian Persian chancery
            documents, but less common in Central Asian Persian manuscripts.</p>
         
         <p>The basic form is: the continuous particle (mē)
            + continuous participle (e.g., karda) + gī + ast. For instance: او
            می‌رفته‌گی‌است, "he is likely to go." In colloquial Tajik, this would be
            compounded as: мерафтагист.</p>
         
         <p>Although this mode does not have a direct parallel in modern Iranian
            Persian, the logic closely matches several construcitons in Central Asian Turkic
            languages. For instance, in Uzbek: u boradigan ekan, "he is likely
            to go."</p>
         <ul>
            <li class="JP">JP: 
               check Uyghur manuals: there may be another way to express a similar
               idea</li>
         </ul>
         
         <p>In Iranian Persian, this idea would be expressed with an additional clause
            (just like in English): احتمال دارد که او برود, "it is likely
            that he will go".</p>
         
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Examples</h3>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  در میانه یگان هفته داخل ولایت چهارجوی
                  <span class="gram_emph">میشده گی است</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: bir hafta orasida Chorjuy viloyatida
                  <span class="gram_emph">bo'ladigan ekan</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph">احتمال دارد که</span>
                  ضرف یک هفته داخل ولایت چهارجوی بشود</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: 
                  <span class="gram_emph">He is likely to be in</span>
                  Chorjuy province within a week</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item"></div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  اگر بلوا شود البته از طرف تاشکند و بخارا عسکر
                  <span class="gram_emph">می آمده گی است</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Agar (bir) balo bo'lsa Toshkent va Buxoro tarafidan askarlar <span class="gram_emph">keladigandir</span>, albatta.
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: If there is an uprising, then an army
                  <span class="gram_emph">will surely come</span>
                  from Tashkent and Bukhara </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item"></div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: "بفقرایان امان قوتنی تعیین کنانیده شد که ماله و اماج و دیگر چیزیکه گرفته گی باشند
                  برده می سپاریده گی ان
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         
         
         
         </section>
          
      <section>
         <h3>References</h3>
         <ul>
            
            <li>Persian / Tajik: Perry (245-246) calls this form "Present-Future
               Conjectural," which "expresses a conjecture about a potential or current (habitual
               or
               iterated) action."</li>
            
            <li>Uyghur:Tomur (360-363). What Hahn calls "Present-Future Obligatory"
               (-idighan + -di + personal suffix, e.g. kelidigandimän "I am supposed to come") is
               treated by Tomur as the Past Imperfect Tense Predicate Form, formed by attaching the
               Past Tense of the Direct Judgment Copula (-idi) to the Imperfect Participle/Adverbial
               (-digan forms). This form can be used to indicate "an intention, plan or agreement
               about
               carrying out an action prior to a certain matter" (361).(</li>
            </ul>
      </section>
      </body>
</html>