<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>The Sandbox</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./bukhari_textbook.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Bukhari Chancery Persian Textbook Development</h1>
      <h2>future-ani</h2>
      <p>PDF version of this file:
         <a href="future-ani.pdf">future-ani.pdf</a></p>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Grammatical Explanation</h3>
         
         <p>Central Asian Turki and Persian share an 'uncertain present-future tense'
            or 'future participle' that expresses intentionality and probability, which is
            constructed simply by adding ī (ی) to the end of the infinative
            verb: کردنی / карданӣ. In terms of
            orthography, Central Asian scribes often (but not always) wrote this form with the
            past
            stem and -nī separated: کرده نی. The
            meaning is not quite "he
            <em>will</em>
            do something": it is closer to "he
            <em>intends</em>
            to do something" or "he
            <em>might</em>
            do something."</p>
         
         <p>Central Asian Persian also retains the present-future tense using the
            می / ме particle, which structurally
            indistinguishable from habitual action: می‌کند / мекунад can mean 'he is doing,' 'he will do,' or 'he (habitually) does'.
            However, this form (می‌کند) most often indicates
            <em>habitual</em>
            action when used in Central Asian Persian.</p>
         <ul>
            <li class="NM">NM: 
               Is this your sense from spoken Tajik? I.e. мекунад is generally "he
               often does something" because Tajiki has -anī for future tense, and istodaast
               for present continuous?</li>
            <li class="JP">JP: 
               Check Bukhari document corpus for examples of mē- being used for
               future or present continuous?</li>
         </ul>
         
         
         <p>Modern Iranian Persian and classical Persian also have a dedicated future
            tense that implies greater certainy, which is vanishingly rare in Central Asian Persian
            (though used in modern Tajik): خواهد کرد / хоҳад
            кард</p>
         <ul>
            <li class="NM">NM: 
               Is this an overstatement, i.e. that хоҳад кард-type future
               constructions are completely absent in Central Asian Persian?</li>
         </ul>
         
         
         
         <p>Turkic languages have multiple ways of expressing future actions that imply
            either intentionality or indeterminancy. Two in particular, -ar and -maqchi, overlap with meanings of the
            -ani ending in Central Asian Persian.</p>
         
         <p>The uncertain present-future tense is expressed with an -ar ending attached
            to the verb stem in Turki. In Uzbek and Chaghatay, the ending is invariable: -ar and
            ار,
            respectively. In Uyghur, it can be either ەر or ار depending on whether the preceding
            consonant is voiced or unvoiced.</p>
         
         <p>There is also significant overlap with the -moqchi /
            ماقچى - مەكچى verbal mood in modern Uzbek and Uyghur, which
            designates the intention to do somethin in the future. This verb form, however, is
            less
            common in pre-Soviet Turki texts, which makes the correspondence between -ar (Turki) and -anī (Central Asian
            Persian) perhaps closer. However, it the -moqchi is structurally
            the most similar to the -anī ending in Persian because both
            the -chi ending (in Uyghur / Uzbek) and the -ī ending (in Persian) can participalize the infinitive verb
            for an animate agent.</p>
         <ul>
            <li class="NM">NM: 
               Is the above assertion true that -moqchi verb form tends to be less
               common in pre-Soviet Uzbek / Chaghatay?</li>
         </ul>
         
         <p>Thus, the -anī ending helps the reader narrow down the intended meaning in
            Central Asian Persian: او به آنجا رفتنی است means that the action
            of 'going' is likely or intended to take place in the future, but that the outcome
            is
            not certain to take place (unlike خواهد رفت in modern Iranian
            Persian).</p>
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Examples</h3>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: یک باب حویلی مانده گی می باشد که مذکور را حکومت
                  بخارا نیز
                  <span class="gram_emph">گرفتنی</span>
                  هستند </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: bir uy qolgan bo'lib, uni ham Bukhoro hukumati
                  <span class="gram_emph">olmoqchi</span>
                  dirlar. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  یک باب خانه باقی مانده است که دولت بخارا
                  <span class="gram_emph">مایل به گرفتن</span>
                  آن است </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: One dwelling remains which the government of Bukhara also
                  <span class="gram_emph">intends to confiscate</span>
                  .</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">
                     <ul>
                        <li class="NM">NM: 
                           The verb for both the Bukhari original and Uzbek translation
                           is plural, but the noun (hukumat-i Buxoro) is technically singular: is
                           this common practice?</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In this example, olmoqchi better approximates the
                     intended meaning of the Persian than olar because it
                     emphasizes the intentionality of the action, rather than the indeterminancy.
                     However, olar is also a possible translations, and the
                     -moqchi ending would have been less likely in
                     nineteenth-century Turki.
                     <ul>
                        <li class="NM">NM: 
                           As with the remark in the introductory explanation, we need
                           to confirm if it is indeed the case that -moqchi is less common in
                           premodern texts.</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">This example was drawn from a bi-lingual document (common for correspondence
                     between Bukharan and Russian colonial respective authorities), which means that
                     we know exactly how the colonial translator understood this construction: Бухарское Правительство также хочет конфисковать, "the
                     Bukharan government also wishes to confiscate..."</div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The 'hovli' is a type of Central Asian house with an open courtyard, and the
                     term is still used. Though it might be understood in Iran as well, it is here
                     translated to the more generic Farsi term for 'house' (خانه).</div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: در روز شنبه ۲۷ ماه رجب پنج نفر گنه گان مذکور شده
                  را جوره بیک میرزا باشی مع یک ضعیفه گنه کار گردانیده آورده در بخارای شریف
                  <span class="gram_emph">بُرده نی</span>
                  شدند </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb:  27-rajab oyining dushanba kuni Jo'rabek Mirzoboshi mazkur besh nafar gunohkorlarni
                  bir ayol bilan gunahkor qilib Buxoroi sharifga
                  <span class="gram_emph">olib bormoqchi</span>
                  bo'ldilar</p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: در روز شنبه ۲۷ ماه رجب جوره بیک میرزا باشی پنج گناه کرده نامبرده را همراه با یک
                  زن، گنه کار شمرد و آورد و
                  <span class="gram_emph">قرار شد که</span>
                  به بخارای شریف
                  <span class="gram_emph">برده شوند</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: On Saturday, the 27th of the month of Rajab (Islamic calendar), Jura Bek Mirza
                  Bashi escorted five aforementioned criminals, along with one girl, who he had (also)
                  accused of criminal activities, and it was decided that they were
                  <span class="gram_emph">all to be brought</span>
                  to Bukhara.</p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In Bukharan chancery orthography, the نی ending is often
                     separated from the verb (here برده‌نی instead of بردنی. This convention makes it easy to mistake this future
                     tense for a negated sentence (e.g., burda na-shudand,
                     'were not taken'). This orthography may be evidence of the vernacular character
                     of this construction, i.e., the scribes transcribed the pronunciation of the
                     verb form, rather than reproducing a participle derived from the infinitive
                     reproduced from the literary tradition.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Jura Bek Mirza is the grammatical subject of the first part of the sentence,
                     but not of the final verb (burdanī), which makes a
                     succinct translation of the passive veb form into English and Farsi wordier. We
                     approximated the meaning with "it was decided that" / قرار شد
                     که, even though the original does not necessarily state that a
                     decision was made.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The term ضعیفه (lit. 'weak' in Arabic) is a common
                     synonym for زن ('woman') in Central Asian Persian.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Note that this scribe freely uses even Arabic conjunctions (مع, 'with'), a common practice in this kind of text.</div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: و دیگر اینکه بنده با روس
                  <span class="gram_emph">جواب کردنی است</span>
                  که تا هر جائی که اهل اسلام است بنده احکام دین و مذهب خود را جاری میکند </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Shuningdek, men yana ruslarga
                  <span class="gram_emph">javob bermoqchimanki</span>
                  , qayerda islom ahli (musulmonlar) bo'lsa men o'sha yerda Islom ahkomlarini tatbiq
                  qilaman. ... </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: دیگر این که اینجانب
                  <span class="gram_emph">مایلم</span>
                  به روس ها
                  <span class="gram_emph">جواب بدهم</span>
                  که هرجایی که اهل اسلام هستند احکام دین و مذهب خود را جاری می کنم </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: This humble servant
                  <span class="gram_emph">intends to seek permission</span>
                  from the Russians to spread the principles of religion to all lands where Muslims
                  reside.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The basic meaning of jawāb is 'answer', but in this
                     context it is an 'answer' to his request for permission (and is used elsewhere
                     in the same file in conjunction with rukhṣat, lit. 'permission').
                     <ul>
                        <li class="JP">JP: 
                           Revisit the original document, revisit English translation to
                           see if there is a way to work in the literal meaning of javob while also
                           retaining the contextual meaning that the petitioner is seeking
                           permission. </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  شاهمردانقلی نام فقرا از ولایت کرکی ادم بیچارهً
                  از برای کار بیچاره گی خود بولایت چهار جوی رفته بدیوانه باغ حجره گرفتار بیچاره گی
                  <span class="gram_emph">کرده نی</span>
                  بوده است که بگفته غمّاران بلشویکان انجا مذکور را دست گرفته محبوس نموده </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Bir guruh odamlarning bergan xabariga ko'ra, Karki viloyatidan bo'lgan Shohmardon
                  Quli ismli bir muhtoj odam muhtojligi (majburligi) sabab Chorjo'y viloyatiga borib
                  Devona Bog'dan
                  <span class="gram_emph">hujra olib o'z ishi bilan shug'ullanmoachi</span>
                  bo'lganda o'sha yerdagi bolsheviklar uni ushlab qamashibdi.
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  
                  
                  </p>
               <ul>
                  <li class="NM">NM: 
                     We need a gloss explanation for ghimmārān: can you suggest a
                     reference for this?</li>
               </ul>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  مرد فقیری از ولایت کرکی به نام شاهمردانقلی از روی بیچارگی برای کار خو به ولایت
                  چهارجوی رفت و در دیوان باغ حجره ای گرفت و می
                  <span class="gram_emph">خواست/ قصد داشت</span>
                  به کار بیچارگی بپردازد که به گفته جاسوسان، بلشویکان او را دستگیر و زندانی کردند </p>
               <ul>
                  <li class="LS">LS: 
                     Added your new translation, but our discussion may change it...
                     (e.g. use of giriftar)</li>
               </ul>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: Shahmardan-quli, a subject from the province of Kerki, went to the province of
                  Charjuy to work in manual labor. When he
                  <span class="gram_emph">was looking for a low-cost room to rent</span>
                  in Divana-bagh, the Bolsheviks imprisoned him based on false pretext. 
                  </p>
               <ul>
                  <li class="NM">NM: 
                     Check this translation.</li>
               </ul>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">This example is particularly helpful for conveying the point that the uncertain
                     future is relative to other actions in the sentence: Shohmardan had been in the
                     process of renting a room - and action that took place in the past, but in the
                     context of the narration was intended to happen in the future - when something
                     else occurred (he was arrested).</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Middle Persian (Pahlavi) verbs formed "nouns of agent" by replacing the final
                     -t or -d with -tār or -dār, respectively,
                     which closely translates to adding -er to a verb in English (e.g., 'laborer')..
                     This construction formed an active noun of agent by default, but certain verbs,
                     including giriftar, were in the passive voice, which
                     is still the standard usage in New Persian. In this example, however, گرفتار is being used as an active noun of agent.
                     <ul>
                        <li class="NM">NM: 
                           In spoken Central Asian Persian, how is giriftar usually
                           used: passively, or actively ('taking' or 'captive')?</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Historical-Grammatical Exploration</h3>
         
         <p> There is some undertainty about whether — from a morphological
            perspective — this tense is formed from the stem or the infinitive (a distinction
            that
            does not matter from the standpoint of reading comprehension). As mentioned in some
            of
            the examples above, orthographic clues seem to suggest that Bukharan scribes understood
            this construction as an -nī suffix added to the past stem, which is suggested by
            (inconsistently) separating the two components with a space: کرده‌نی.</p>
         
         <p>In modern Persian, "adjectives of merit / worthiness," also known as "liyāqat adjectives," are a type of verbal adjective formed by
            adding the suffix -ī / یی to the
            infinitive stem. For instance: خوردنی، دیدنی، گسستنی. As in
            Central Asian Persian, these adjectives belong to the future tense category in terms
            of
            their aspectual modality. However, in practice this form tends to imply desirability
            or
            worthiness of action (hence liyāqat, lit. 'worthiness') in
            the future, rather than intent or possibility: این فیلم دیدنی
            است, 'this film is worth seeing'. For this reason, the subject of -ani constructions tend to be animate in Central Asian Persian,
            but inanimate in Iranian Persian.</p>
         <ul>
            <li class="LS">LS: 
               Do we want to include some examples from classical Persian and /or
               further discussion?</li>
         </ul>
         
         <p></p>
         
         
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>References</h3>
         <ul>
            
            <li>Central Asian Persian / Tajik: Perry, 264-267 discusses this construction as
               the "future participle" meaning "about to do something" with the "connotation of
               volition or intention."</li>
            
            <li>Uyghur: De Jong (128-130) discusses ار / ەر as the
               "uncertain present-future tense," which expresses an action in the future with "vague
               intention, or probability."</li>
            
            <li>Farsi: The classic studies of the liyāqat construction are Ṣādiqī, ʿAlī Ashraf
               (1993/1372) “Shīvihā va imkānāt-i vāzhisāzi dar zabān-i fārsī-yi muʿāṣir”, Nashr-i
               dānish, sāl-i 13, shumāri-yi 3 pp, 9-15 va shumāri-yi 4, pp 15-23.</li>
            </ul>
      </section>
      </body>
</html>