<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>The Sandbox</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./bukhari_textbook.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Bukhari Chancery Persian Textbook Development</h1>
      <h2>mandan-permission</h2>
      <p>PDF version of this file:
         <a href="mandan-permission.pdf">mandan-permission.pdf</a></p>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Grammatical Explanation</h3>
         
         <p>In Turkic languages, Central Asian Persian, and Iranian Farsi alike, the
            verb for 'to put' has a secondary meaning of 'to allow.' For instance, "I let the
            child
            go": بچه (را) گذشتم برود</p>
         
         
         <p>In Farsi, māndan is only used for 'to remain';
            in Tajik / Central Asian Persian, māndan is used both for 'to ramain' and transitively
            for 'to put'. Guzāshtan is rarely used in in spoken Tajik,
            but appears in written texts.</p>
         
         <p>In Uzbek and Uyghur, the verb qo'ymoq has a similar
            function to mean 'to let'. For instance: bolani ketishga qo'yib
            berdim, 'I let the children go.'</p>
         
         
         
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Examples</h3>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: خط بنام وکیل مُسمّاة مریه الیکسیندرونی نیکلای
                  الیکسی ویچ پرواشین نویسانده مُهر نموده در جوف خط
                  <span class="gram_emph">مانده</span>
                  فرستادیم</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Janobi oliylari, sizning fuqarolarga manzur bo‘lgan muborak hukmingiz kabi yana bir
                  muborak hukmingizni tayyorlab olib
                  <span class="gram_emph">qo‘ysinlar</span>
                  . </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: A letter addressed to the representative of Maria Aleksandrovna - i.e., Nikolai
                  Alekseevich Pravashin - was written, a seal was applied, we
                  <span class="gram_emph">put</span>
                  it in an envelope and sent it.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In terms of form, serialized verbs (a style common in Central Asian Turki and
                     Persian) is indistinguishable from auxiliary verb: the only way to distinguish
                     them is by context.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Note that نویساندن is in the causative, suggesting that
                     someone else (e.g., a scribe) was tasked with writing the letter.</div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: مهربان پناها مبارکنامهً فقرایان بجنابشان منظور
                  شده گیست بمثل آن یک مبارکنامهً حکم عرض کرده گرفته طیاری نموده
                  <span class="gram_emph">مانند</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Janobi oliylari, sizning fuqarolarga manzur bo‘lgan muborak hukmingiz kabi yana bir
                  muborak hukmingizni tayyorlab olib
                  <span class="gram_emph">qo‘ysinlar</span>
                  .</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: Oh Refuge of Benevolence,
                  <span class="gram_emph">let them</span>
                  (the chancery officials) prepare a royal decree similar to the one that had
                  previously satisfied the people.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               <h4>Comments:</h4>
               <div class="gloss-comments">
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The language in this sentence is convoluted because of the implicit hierarchy
                     that goes into drafting a mubārak-nāma. A mubārak-nāma is a royal decree that must, procedurally,
                     come from the Amir. In practice, however, the Qushbegi's office implemented
                     these directives to be rubber-stamped by the Amir's seal. Thus, in this
                     document, lower-level officials are requesting that the Qushbegi submits a
                     requestعرض کرده) that the Amir authorize (حکم) the preparation of the royal decree; once the
                     Qushbegi's office receives (گرفته) that authorization,
                     let him have is people draft the document.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The third person plural مانند in this sentence might be
                     translated in the passive voice ('let it be prepared'), but the implication is
                     that the scribal staff will draft the decree.</div>
                  </div>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>References</h3>
         <ul>
            
            <li></li>
            </ul>
      </section>
      </body>
</html>