<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>The Sandbox</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./bukhari_textbook.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Bukhari Chancery Persian Textbook Development</h1>
      <h2>non-witnessed</h2>
      <p>PDF version of this file: 
         <a href=".pdf">.pdf</a></p>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Grammatical Explanation</h3>
         
         <p>Turkic languages distinguish grammatically between events the agent saw
            with their own eyes, and events that were reported by someone else who is usually
            unspecified. Whereas languages such as English would accomplish this with an additional
            clause ("I heard that" or "they say that"), Central Asian Turkic and Persian achieve
            the
            same effect more succinctly with dedicated verbal modes. Whether or not the agent
            'heard' the information, learned from a report, or somehow otherwise intuited it,
            does
            not affect form of this construction: the dedicated grammatical forms are indicative
            of
            a categorical distinction in terms of the kind of information being conveyed.</p>
         
         <p>Not surprisingly, the non-witnessed mood is especially common in surviving
            historical official documents because the person writing the document (a scribe working
            in the central chancery) is generally not writing from firsthand experience.</p>
         
         <p>Central Asian Turki indicates that event was not witnessed in the present
            with ekan (ئىكەن) for the verb 'to be'. For
            instance: siz vafodor ekansiz: '(I have heard that) you are
            loyal.'</p>
         
         <p>The particle ekan / ئەكەن can
            also be paired with the perfect verbal adjective -gan (گەن / غان) to indicate hearsay about past
            action. For instance: bu kishi og'rini urgan ekan: 'this man hit
            the thief (but I did not see the event myself)'</p>
         
         <p>The -gan ekan construction is similar in meaning to
            the 'subjective past tense,' which conjoins the present -ip
            adverbial with the past tense verb 'to be'. For instance: poezd
            kelipti: '(I heard that) the train arrived'.</p>
         
         <p>Central Asian Persian incorporates this logic by combining the past
            participle of the main verb and the present perfect of the auxiliary verb "to be."
            For
            instance: او را دیده بوده است: '(I) heard that he had seen him /
            her.' There is a construction that has a similar meaning in the 'durative' (ماضی نقلی استمری), describing a continuous action that often takes
            place in the present (though past / present / future temporality of the action depends
            on the sentence context), which makes it uncommon in historical texts (which generally
            describe finite actions in the past): می کرده است, '(s)he is
            (apparently) doing'.</p>
         
         
         <p>Unlike some of the other features of Central Asian Persian discussed in
            this book, the non-witnessed mode is not categorically absent in either classical
            or
            modern Iranian Persian: it is described in some grammar manuals and sometimes appears
            in
            modern media (though usually without the final است in کرده بوده است. However, this mode is more rarely used, and
            generally requires additional context to clarify the non-witnessed character of the
            action (e.g., appearing in narration).</p>
         
         <p>In some classical texts, this form may or may not clearly indicate
            non-witnessed mode. For instance, this example from Bayhaqi's history indicates some
            degree of uncertainty or conjecture:  خواجه احمد] دانسته بوده است كه
            خداوند رأیِ شكار كرده است] ("[Khwaja Ahmad] surmised that his lord intended
            to go hunting."</p>
         
         <p>However, in most other cases, the construction as used in classical
            Persian texts indicates that an action took place in the distant, uncertain past.
            (In
            other words, the same construction of the past participle of the main verb and the
            present perfect of būdan often carries a different meaning
            than it does in Central Asian Persian and modern Tajik.) For instance: عرب ...طاووس ندیده بوده اند ("The Arabs had never, ever seen a peacock.") Or
            a more recent example: جدش پنجاه سال عمر کرده بوده است ("His ancestor, [who lived
            sometime in the distant, indeterminate past], had lived to the age of fifty years."
            20)</p>
         
         
         <p>By contrast, the non-witness mode is ubiquitous in Central Asian Persian
            documents, in modern Tajik (both spoken and formal), and — importantly — does not
            require any additional context (e.g., 'I heard that...') to clarify that the action
            was
            non-witnessed.</p>
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Examples</h3>
         
         <div class="exsec">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: چنین
                  <span class="gram_emph">آگاهی نموده بوده اند</span>
                  که </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: shunday
                  <span class="gram_emph">xabar bergan ekanlarki</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: چنین
                  <span class="gram_emph">آمده است</span>
                  که </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: (I was told that)
                  <span class="gram_emph">it was made known</span>
                  that... </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <li>This is an extremely common way for information to be conveyed in official
                     documents: the scribing author neither specifies which individuals conveyed the
                     information, nor does he claim to have heard it with his own ears.</li>
                  
                  <li>In the modern Iranian Persian example the passive construction for 'it is said'
                     (آمده است) approximates this non-witnessed meaning;
                     گفته شده would convey the same meaning.</li>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         
         <div class="exsec">
            
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: دعا گویشان اینغلامشانرا
                  <span class="gram_emph">دیده بوده است</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb:  Janobi oliyingiz bu kaminani
                  <span class="gram_emph">ko'rgan ekan</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: 
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: I
                  <span class="gram_emph">have seen</span>
                  [not with my own eyes, but based on what others reported] these servants of the
                  sovereign.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <li></li>
                  
                  <li>The -shān in this sentence refers back to the figure of the sovereign, in this
                     case the Amir of Bukhara: the humble prayer-sayer (duʿā-gū) refers to the author
                     ('I') of the document whose prayers bless the sovereign; the 'slave' (ghulām) is
                     most likely a slave in the metaphorical sense by this time period, though the
                     term is ambiguous.</li>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="exsec">
            
            
            
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  ازینوجه پرستوف دیوانه باغ
                  <span class="gram_emph">استفسار نموده بوده است</span>
                  که مسمّاة مذکوره کشاده خط بنام خودش بوده گی را نشان داده است </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: shu sababdan Devona Bog'dagi nozir (pristavi) so'rab-so'rishtirgan-da, mazkur ayol
                  o'zining nomiga yozilgan ochiq xatni
                  <span class="gram_emph">ko'rsatgan ekan</span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: به همین دلیل، ناظر دیوان باغ بازجویی کرده بوده است و زن مورد اشاره گشادنامه را که
                  به نام خودش بوده است نشان داده است
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: For this reason, the Pristav of Divana-Bagh conducted an inquiry and exa
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <li></li>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         </section>
      
      <section>
         <h3>References</h3>
         
         <li>Uyghur: De Jong (pp. 108-110, ch. XIV) treats the -ipti construction as
            "subjective past tense," which is "used when the present relevance of an event or
            act in
            the past has to be stressed. It implies that the speaker's words are based on hearsay,
            and/or that the speaker has become aware of something unexpected."</li>
         
         <li>Central Asian Persian: Perry (pp. 227-234 offers the most complete
            discussion of this mode, and suggests the terminology "non-witnessed mode" we have
            adopted.</li>
         
         <li>Iranian Persian: Ḥasan Aḥmadī Gīvī (p. 459) describes this form as the
            'remote past' (māżī-yi abʿad) the speaker usually conveys the occurrence of action
            through a quotation and wants to highlight that they were absent and unaware of the
            event at the time of its occurrence but learned about it afterwards. Gīvī further
            clarifies that the concepts of witnessed and non-witnessed or awareness and unawareness
            are weak and understated in classical Persian texts.</li>
         </section>
      </body>
</html>