<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>The Sandbox</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="./bukhari_textbook.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Bukhari Chancery Persian Textbook Development</h1>
      <h2>The -dagi participle</h2>
      <p>PDF version of this file:
         <a href="The -dagi participle.pdf">The -dagi participle.pdf</a></p>
      
      <section>
         <h3>Grammatical Explanation</h3>
         
         
         <p>The "participle-ization" of Central Asian Persian stands among the
            features that most distinguishes it from classical and modern Iranian Persian. It
            is
            also — not coincidentally — the grammatical logic that makes Central Asian Persian
            most
            similar to Turkic languages.</p>
         
         <p>Modern Iranian Persian uses relative particles, much like English: که works much like "that" or "which." For instance: "The student
            read the book, which his teacher had given to him" (донишҷӯ китоб-е-ро
            хонд ки устодаш онро ба ӯ додааст دانشجو کتابی را خواند که
            استادش به او داده بود )</p>
         
         <p>The same idea could be expressed in Central Asian Persian (which retains
            the relative particle که as well) as follows: شاگرد کتابِ استاذش داده گی را خواند:
            <em>lit.</em>
            "The student read the given-to-him-by-his-teacher book." Grammatically, استاذش داده گی is functioning as an adjective modifying کتاب, just like a participle in English, and following logic more typical of
            Turkic languages. Note that the indirect object was explicit in the modern Tajik /
            Iranian Persian example ("to him," i.e., the student) but implied in this sentence
            — an
            ambiguity typical of both Turkic and Bukhari chancery Persian. Note also that the
            relative marker (nishāna-i mawṣūlī, i.e. the ی) used in the که construction is not used in the
            -dagi construction (i.e., کتابی که, but کتابِ
            داده گی). </p>
         
         
         
         
         
         
         <p>This grammatical logic is foreign to modern Iranian Persian, but standard
            to Central Asian Turkic languages. For instance, the same sentence would be rendered
            as
            talaba o‘qituvchisi bergan kitobni o‘qidi / 
            ئوقۇغۇچى ئوقۇتقۇچى بەرگەن كىتابنى ئوقىدى .</p>
         
         
         
         </section>
      
      
      <section>
         <h3>Examples</h3>
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  ترتیب نامه
                  <span class="gram_emph">فرستاده گی</span>
                  نایب ایلچی بجنابعالیحضرتم منظورِ نظرِ انورِ هماوین عالی موالیم شود </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Elchining o'rinbosari tomonidan
                  <span class="gram_emph">yuborilgan</span>
                  (ko'rsatmalar) hujjat Amir hazratga ma'qul bo'ladi, deb o'ylayman. </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  این ترتیب نامه ای است
                  <span class="gram_emph">که</span>
                  نایب ایلچی آن را به جناب عالی حضرت
                  <span class="gram_emph">فرستاده است</span>
                  تا از نظر مبارک او بگذرد </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: Let the instructional memo,
                  <span class="gram_emph">which was sent</span>
                  by the assistant to the Political Agent, grace the radiant eyes of His Majesty (the
                  Amir)</p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The participle in this example is both preceded and followed by an iżāfa
                     genitive connector (which is not marked in the original script): tartīb-nāma-i
                     firistāda-gī-yi nāyib.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">elchi (ایلچی) is a Turki word for 'ambassador,' but
                     always refers to the Russian Political Agent in this context.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Readers of early modern documents must become accustomed for lofty euphemisms
                     and honorifics. In this example, the language revolves around the royal gaze of
                     the amir: the memo referenced at the beginning of the original sentence is
                     'seen' (manẓūr, using an Arabic passive participle) by the radiant ('anwar'),
                     'august' (humāyūn) 'gaze' (naẓar, from the same Arabic root as the
                     participle).</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Iranian Persian has euphemism similar in meaning, which appears in the
                     translation: از نظر مبارک او بگذرد, 'to pass [before] his
                     [referring to the sovereign] auspicious gaze</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The question of document type and hierarchy in Perso-Islamic cultures of
                     documentation is a challenging one, and it becomes even more so in the
                     quasi-colonial context in which most Bukharan documents were written. This is
                     partly because Perso-Islamic document types often imply a hierarchy (e.g., a
                     farmān was a royal order from a superior to infereior, whereas an ʿarża was a
                     'petition' from an inferior to superior): the Russian conquest distorted those
                     hierarchies, and rendered them more ambiguous. Tartīb-nāma (lit. 'arrangement
                     letter') seems to have been a novel document type referring to official
                     instructions circulated by Bukharan officials at the 'request' of the Russian
                     Political Agent.</div>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: بمکتوب از وجه محافظت کردن بعضی نشانگاه اسباب
                  قدیمئ
                  <span class="gram_emph">میبرامده گی</span>
                  توابعات بخارای شریف اعلام نموده اند</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Maktub orqali Buxoroyi Sharifga tobe' hududlardan
                  <span class="gram_emph">chiqadigan</span>
                  qadimiy arxeologik ashyolardan nishona ba'zi joylarni muhofazat qilishlarini ma'lum
                  qilganlar.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  از طریق این نوشته، محافظت از بناهای توابع بخارای شریف را
                  <span class="gram_emph">که</span>
                  از آنها اشیاء قدیمی
                  <span class="gram_emph">استخراج شده است</span>
                  اعلام کرده اند </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: This letter has informed (us) of preservation of the ruins,
                  <span class="gram_emph">which have been discovered</span>
                  outside of Bukhara. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Note that adjectives (and therefore participles) precede the modified noun in
                     Turkic languages, but come after the noun in Persian. In this example, an izofa
                     construction connects اسبابِ قدیمئ to میبرامده گی</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">The verb برآمدن is the standard verb for 'to leave,' 'to
                     exit' in modern Tajik as well (баромадан), but not used in
                     Iranian Persian.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">asbāb - which means 'reasons' in Arabic - may seem a curious word to refer
                     broadly to objects (in this case, material remains). However, this usage is
                     common to South Asia as well.</div>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: در قیشلاق سرای حدثه واقع شده در آنجاه
                  <span class="gram_emph">استقامت داشته گی</span>
                  رعیه روسیه عبد مۇمن ولد محمد حسین را بقتل رسانیداند </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb:  Qishloq joyida bir voqea sodir bo'lib, u yerda
                  <span class="gram_emph">yashaydigan</span>
                  Rossiya (imperiyasi) fuqarosi Abdimo'min Muhammad Husayn o'g'lini o'ldirishdi. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  در "قشلاق سرای" حادثه ای رخ داده است. عبد مۇمن ولد محمد حسین را که تبعه روسیه
                  بوده و
                  <span class="gram_emph">که در آنجا اقامت داشته</span>
                  به قتل رسانده اند
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: In the village estate an incident occurred: a Russian subject, Abd al-Mumin ibn
                  Muhammad Husayn,
                  <span class="gram_emph">who resided there,</span>
                  was murdered.
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Note the use of the gerund واقع شده ('taking place'): as discussed in chapter
                     [[]]: this style is acceptable in Iranian Persian,
                     but more favored in Turkic languages (-ib) to break up
                     parts of the sentence, which would usually be expressed with a conjunction
                     (و) in classical Persian or a sentence break in
                     modern Persian.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">raʿīya, alongside fuqarāʾ
                     (which evolved to mean 'citizen' in the singular in modern Uzbek and Uyghur), is
                     a ubiquitous term meaning 'subject' (and equivalent to the imperial category
                     подданный / poddannyi in
                     Russian). This example makes it clear that Abd al-Mumin was a Russian subject,
                     though almost certainly not ethnically Russian. The term for subjecthood used in
                     the Qajar context (تابع) was rarely, if ever, used with
                     this specific legal meaning in Central Asia.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In this context, qishlāq-sarāy is most likely a
                     generic term referring to a village estate rather than a proper noun.</div>
                  
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         
         
         
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh: عرضه های تاتار ها بتوغریگی مایانرا حکومت بخارا
                  بوقت شهر در آمدن اما دستگیر نموده حبس میکرده اند
                  <span class="gram_emph">گفته گی</span>
                  دروغ بوده جماعهً مذکور بعرض فاسد اینطریقه عرض را کرده اند</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Tatarlarning da'wosiga ko'ra, haqiqatda Buxoro hukumati shaharga kirishda bizlarni
                  shaharga kiraverishda ushlab qamab qo'ymoqda,
                  <span class="gram_emph">deganlari</span>
                  yolg'on bo'lib, mazkur jamoa xato ariza bergan ekan.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars:  شکایت‌نامۀ تاتارها،
                  <span class="gram_emph">که</span>
                  نوشته اند «ما را حکومکت بخارا هنگام ورودمان به شهر دستگیر و حبس می‌کرده است،»
                  <span class="gram_emph">گفته‌‌ای</span>
                  دروغ بوده است. گروه مورد اشاره با بیانی نادرست چنین شکایتی را نوشته‌اند
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: The Tatars'
                  <span class="gram_emph">stated claim</span>
                  <span class="gram_emph">(which they submitted</span>
                  as a petition), that actually the government of Bukhara arrested them when they
                  entered the city, is a lie. The aforementioned group submitted an improper
                  petition.</p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">This Central Asian Persian example features the direct adoption of a Turki loan
                     word: to'g'ri. The basic meaning of the word is 'correct' or 'straight' (similar
                     to راست in Persian). Adopted into Persian in this
                     example, بتوغریگی means 'actually' or 'in fact,' similar
                     to در واقع in Farsi.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">This sentence features quoted speech, i.e., the claim that "we" were detained
                     is designated as direct speach by گفته گی / degan. This
                     is confusing because the first instance of the first person plural (مایانرا) refers to the Bukharan government officials
                     investigating the claim, whereas the second instance (در آمدن
                     اما) refers to the Tatars making the false claim.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In both modern Farsi and Tajik, the extra alif in در آمدن
                     اما is superfluous and would be در آمدن ما,
                     but is a common convention in document writing — perhaps simply for
                     readability.</div>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  ایلجی اعلحضرات ایمپراطور معظم روس به بخارای نو
                  بوده گی کار استفسار در قشلاق سرای مکر
                  <span class="gram_emph">بقتل رسیده گی</span>
                  رعیهً روسیه عبد المۇمن اوف را حقیقت کرده قرار کرداست </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb: Yangi Buxorodagi rus elchisi Saroyi Makr qishlog'idagi
                  <span class="gram_emph">qatl qilingan</span>
                  Rossiya fuqorasi Abd al-Muminov ishi yuzasidan taftish qildi. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: سفیرِ روس در بخارای نو دستور داد که تابعِ روسئ عبد المؤمن را،
                  <span class="gram_emph">که در دهِ سرای مکر قتل شده بود</span>
                  ، تحقیق بکند </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: The Political Agent in New Bukhara ordered that an investigation be carried out
                  about the Russian subject Abd al-Mumin,
                  <span class="gram_emph">who was murdered</span>
                  in the village of Saray-Makr. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In Turki, both the -dagi ending, and the -gan participle, can approximate the
                     -dagi idea in Persian.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">In this context, term رعیه corresponded to the Russian
                     подданный ('subject'), and was often used synonymously
                     with فقراء (the same word as fuqaro, which means
                     'citizen' in modern Uzbek).</div>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         <div class="example">
            
            <div class="bukh">
               <p>bukh:  معلوم است که از روی شرطنامهً دوستیً بین دولتین
                  علیّتین شده گی از هر طریقه اموال تجارتی از مملکت رسی به بخارای شریف
                  <span class="gram_emph">میآمده گی</span>
                  اینچنین اموال تجارتی از مملک بخارا خرید شده بمملکت رسی
                  <span class="gram_emph">میرفت گی</span>
                  دو نیم پرسنت زکوة دادن مقرر شده گی میباشد
                  <span class="gram_emph"></span>
                  </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="uzb">
               <p>uzb:  Ma'lumki, ikki buyuk davlat o'rtasida imzolangan do'stlik-hamkorlik shartnomasiga
                  ko'ra, Rossiya hududining har qayeridan Buxoroyi sharifga olib
                  <span class="gram_emph">kiriladigan</span>
                  tijorat mollaridan, shuningdek, Buxoro hukumatidan sotib olingan va Rossiya
                  hududiga
                  <span class="gram_emph">yuboriladigan</span>
                  tijorat mollari uchun 2,5 (ikki yarim) foiz miqdorda zakot (solig'ini) berish
                  tayinlab qo'yilgan. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="fars">
               <p>fars: مبرهن است که طبق معاهده دوستی میان دو دولت بلندمرتبه گشته، بر اموال تجاری ای
                  <span class="gram_emph">که</span>
                  به هر طریق از کشور روسیه به بخارای شریف
                  <span class="gram_emph">می آید</span>
                  متقابلاً / همینطور بر اموال تجاری ای که از مملکت بخارا خریده شده به مملکت روسیه می
                  رود دو و نیم درصد زکات تعیین شده است </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="eng">
               <p>eng: Let it be known that -- with regard to the treaty of friendship between the two
                  countries -- trade goods
                  <span class="gram_emph">that come from</span>
                  Russia to Bukhara and, likewise, trade goods
                  <span class="gram_emph">which are purchased</span>
                  in Bukhara and go to Russia, have been established at two-and-a-half percent
                  [tarriff]. </p>
            </div>
            
            <div class="gloss">
               Comments:
               
               <ul>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">This example is especially participle-heavy — but not in a way that is atypical
                     for these kinds of documents. Note that there are even more participles than the
                     English translation suggests (e.g., the first شده گی,
                     which clarifies that the treaty was sealed in the past.</div>
                  
                  <div class="gloss-item">Note the Russian loan word for 'percent' (процент).
                     Modern Uzbek and Tajik use an Arabic loan word (foiz /
                     فائض, lit. 'excess') for 'percent'.</div>
                  </ul>
            </div>
            </div>
         
         
         </section>
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      <section>
         <h3>References</h3>
         Chaghatay: Schluessel (58-60).
         Uyghur: De Jong (ch. XVII) treats these constructions as "verbal
         adjectives."
         Farsi: Perry (398-407) offers a detailed discussion of the relative particle
         kih (i.e., as used in modern Iranian Persian and Tajik) 
         Central Asian Persian: Perry, 411-413 also offers a briefer discussion of
         the nominalized participles typical of Bukharan chancery Persian. 
         </section>
      </body>
</html>