<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/bactriana_master.css"/>
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Cinzel" rel="stylesheet"/>
        <title>Bactriana</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <nav>
            <a class = "nav" href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
            <a class = "nav" href="about.xhtml">About</a>
            <a class = "nav" href="workshop.xhtml">Workshop</a>
        </nav>
        <h1>Bactriana</h1>
        <h2>About This Website</h2>
        <h3>Contents</h3>
        <div class = "toc">
        <ul>
            <li><a href = "#site">About the Site</a></li>
            <li><a href = "#scholar">About the Scholar</a></li>
            <li><a href = "#research">About the Research</a></li>
            <li><a href = "#teaching">About the Teaching</a></li>
            <li><a href = "#dh">About the Digital Humanities</a></li>
            <li><a href = "#place">About the Place</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
        <h3 id = "site">The Site</h3>
        <p>Bactriana is a multi-purpose research and teaching website.</p>



        <h3 id ="scholar">The Scholar</h3>

        <p>Bactriana is maintained by <a target="_blank" href="https://pitt.academia.edu/JamesPickett">James Pickett</a>. <a target="_blank" href="http://www.history.pitt.edu/people/james-pickett">James is an assistant professor in the history department</a> at the University of Pittsburgh (<a target="_blank" href="https://pitt.academia.edu/JamesPickett/CurriculumVitae">curriculum vitae</a >). He can be reached at pickettj[at]pitt.edu.</p>


        <h3 id = "research">The Research</h3>

        <p>Most broadly, <a target = "_blank" href = "https://pitt.academia.edu/JamesPickett/Journal-Articles">James's research</a> focuses on Islam and empire in Eurasia. His first major book project, <em>Polymaths of Islam: Power and Networks of Knowledge in Central Asia</em> (forthcoming in 2020), examines transregional networks of exchange among religious scholars in the Central Asian city-state of Bukhara.</p>

        <p>This research produced a number of articles along the way.</p>



        <h3 id = "teaching">The Teaching</h3>

        <p>James likes to think of his core undergraduate courses as a "Eurasian trilogy." The first part of the sequence, "<a target="_blank" href="https://www.academia.edu/38158975/Rise_of_Islam_Syllabus_">Rise of Islam</a>," considers religion and empire from the world of late antiquity to the eve of the Mongol conquest. Part two, "<a target="_blank" href="https://www.academia.edu/28288742/Empires_of_the_Steppe_Eurasia_from_the_Mongols_to_the_Soviet_Union_Syllabus_">Empires of the Steppe</a>," picks up exactly where "Rise of Islam" left off, asking why nomadic empires were so powerful for so much of history, only to be marginalized by colonial empires in the modern period. The third track on this Eurasian mix tape is "<a target="_blank" href="https://www.academia.edu/37326736/Imperial_Russia_Syllabus_">Russia to 1917</a>," which shifts the focus to one of those aforementioned colonial empires in particular, and considers how a Mongol dependency came to dominate Eursia.</p>

        <p>In the not-so-distant future, James also aims to teach a course on computational methods in the humanities. He also teaches numerous undergraduate and graduate tutorials, usually related to nineteenth-century Eurasian history, and often with an emphasis on engaging Russian historical sources.</p>


        <h3 id = "dh">The Digital Humanities</h3>



        <h3 id = "place">The Place</h3>


    </body>
</html>
